<!-- Autogenerated by mlir-tblgen; don't manually edit -->
### `-vast-export-fn-info`: Create JSON that exports information about function arguments.
Lowers module into llvm IR and dumps it on stderr.

#### Options
```
-o : Output JSON file to be created.
```
### `-vast-hl-lower-enums`: Lower high-level enums and their usages to their underlying types.
Lower enum usages to their underlying types - this will effectively remove the enum itself.
### `-vast-hl-lower-types`: Lower high-level types to standard types
Lower high-level types into standard types which is usually required first step
by other passes in the pipeline.

Information about bit sizes of high level types is inferred from the data layout of
the module, which is derived from the information provided by clang and emitted
automatically by `vast-cc`.

TODO: Named types are not yet supported.
### `-vast-hl-structs-to-tuples`: Transform hl.struct into std tuples.
This pass is still a work in progress.
### `-vast-hl-to-ll`: HL -> LL conversion
Pass lowers high-level operations into low-level (for now, llvm dialect is used) dialects.
Operations in other dialects are not touched and kept as they are. Requires types to be
in standard dialect (only on relevant instructions).

This pass is still a work in progress.
### `-vast-hl-to-scf`: Lower control flow constructs into SCF.
Pass lowers high-level control flow constructs (such as `IfOp` for example) to their
equivalents in `SCF` dialect. Requires types on relevant operations to be in standard
dialect.

This pass is still a work in progress.
### `-vast-llvm-dump`: Pass for developers to quickly dump module as llvm ir.
Lowers module into llvm IR and dumps it on stderr.

#### Options
```
-bc-file : Specify file where to dump the bitcode
```
